I am so sorry.
It's my fault, please, forgive me.
No matter how we phrase it, it can be difficult to apologize.
Why is that so challenging?
There are many reasons.
We may fear confrontation, lame or rejection.
Perhaps we feel embarrassed and we're too proud to apologize.
We may reason, apologizing will not undo the blunder I've already made.
And it may even be that we are angry.
This is such a matter of concern that in July 2000, the California State Legislature in
the United States passed a bill designed to relieve people of liability if they express
sympathy to an individual who was injured in an accident in which they themselves were
involved.
It was noted that people often hesitate to extend an apology out of concern that it could
be construed in court as an admission of guilt.
The Bible provides an account of a faithful servant, the Apostle Paul, who was a good example
of one who apologized.
The account is in the Book of Acts, chapter 23.
The setting, a Roman military officer wanted to know why Paul was being accused by the Jews.
So he brought Paul to the Jewish chief priests and commanded the Sanhedrin, the high court,
to assemble.
As we read Acts chapter 23 verses 1 through 5 together, we can't help but be impressed
by Paul's boldness as he stands for what is right.
But at the same time, please take note of his humility.
Looking intently at the Sanhedrin, Paul said,
Men, brothers, I have behaved before God with a perfectly clear conscience down to this day.
At this, the high priest and an I has ordered those standing by him to strike him on the mouth.
Then Paul said to him,
God is going to strike you, you whitewashed wall.
Do you sit to judge me according to the law and at the same time violate the law by commanding me to be struck?
Those standing by said,
Are you insulting the high priest of God?
And Paul said,
Brothers, I did not know he was high priest.
For it is written, you must not speak injuriously of a ruler of your people.
Paul immediately admitted his heir.
What he had said, that the one appointed his judge,
should not resort to violence, was right.
Yet he apologized.
In the following dramatization, we will see an older sister applying the inspired words of Titus chapter 2 verses 3 through 5
in order to advise younger sisters to be sound in mind.
We will also observe how one of the younger sisters avoids further problems and pursues peace by humbly apologizing.
I don't know how this happened.
But Haley, I'm sorry.
It hurts me to see you so upset.
First, what you heard was not what I said.
I thought that's how you felt.
And even if I got that part wrong, all this drama...
Let's stop.
Come on, girls.
Haley, come closer.
Love is patient and kind.
It's not jealous.
It doesn't become provoked even when things become difficult.
So what are we going to do?
I just thought they've been...
No, I'm sorry, Haley.
I'm sorry.
I shouldn't have judged you so harshly.
I shouldn't have judged you at all.
And I'm sorry for dragging you into this, but twisting what you said.
It's okay. Things happen.
I've been a person.
I should never have spoken that way to you, Celia.
To either of you, I'm tonight.
I'll call you tomorrow.
The older sister apologized even though she was not in the wrong.
She also urged the two younger sisters to make peace.
It takes courage, humility, and determination to apologize.
It's interesting to note what stated at Philippians chapter 2 and verse 3.
Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism.
But with humility, consider others superior to you.
That means our determined effort is not to win an argument which could be contentious.
Nor do we want to start a discussion with the primary thought being that
we are in the right.
That means that we are self-concerned or egotistical.
Rather, in harmony with the principle of that scripture,
we want to act with humility.
Our aim should be to pursue peace.
Even if we think the other person is being unreasonable, we apologize.
Why is it so important to do so?
Because that is what makes our worship to Jehovah acceptable.
At Matthew chapter 5 verses 23 and 24, Jesus makes it very clear.
If then, you are bringing your gift to the older.
And there you remember that your brother has something against you.
Leave your gift there in front of the older and go away.
First, make your peace with your brother.
And then come back and offer your gift.
One Bible scholar describes the scene this way.
The worshipper has entered the temple.
He has passed through its series of courts, the court of the Gentiles,
the court of the women, the court of the men.
Beyond that, there lay the court of the priests,
into which the laymen could not go.
The worshipper is standing at the rail,
ready to hand over his living animal to the priest.
At that critical moment,
the worshipper remembers that his brother has something against him.
What is he to do?
Leave your gift there in front of the altar, Jesus explains.
And go away.
What does Jesus say is more important in offering up a sacrifice?
First, make peace with your brother.
Then, when you have come back, offer up your gift.
The expression rendered make your peace means to reconcile.
Jesus' words teach a crucial lesson.
Reconciliation or peace comes before sacrifice.
The way we treat fellow worshippers
has a direct bearing on our relationship with God.
1 John 4 verse 20 pointedly says,
for the one who does not love his brother whom he has seen
cannot love God whom he has not seen.
If we find ourselves in a situation
when we have offended a fellow worshipper,
we want to apply Jesus' counsel.
We want to take the initiative to approach our brother or sister.
We may need to acknowledge their hurt feelings.
We may also need to ask,
what can I do to make amends?
Often, a sincere apology is all that is needed.
Although our worship today no longer includes animal sacrifices,
what Jesus was teaching emphasizes that there is a connection
between peace with our brother and acceptable worship to God.
When two humans are at odds,
there may be a measure of blame on both sides,
since both are imperfect and prone to error.
This usually calls for mutual concessions.
Even if only the one apologizing is right.
The issue is not so much who is right and who is wrong,
but who will take the initiative to make peace?
When the Apostle Paul heard that the Christians in Corinth
were taking fellow servants of God to secular courts
over personal differences,
he said,
why do you not rather let yourself be wrong?
Why do you not rather let yourself be defrauded?
The principle is clear.
Peace among fellow believers is more important than proving
who is right and who is wrong.
Keeping this in mind makes it easier to apologize for wrong
that someone thinks we have committed against him or her.
A heart-felt apology can open the way to a constructive conversation.
It can minimize problems and restore peace.
Brother Lynette Myers, a helper to the writing committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
Seek peace and pursue it by forgiving freely.